There's something about Pinker's writing that draws me in. I read "The Better Angels of our Nature", who's content is provocative for sure (it's about how violence has declined over time), and I assumed it was the subject matter that fascinated me. Later, when I began to read his "Sense of Style" I was surprised that I still got the same kick out of it, because let's face it, a writing guide is a much less interesting topic. When I read Pinker, there's a feeling of elegance to the writing, a charming clarity to the sentences, a feeling that the writing is dense with information and has little waste, it seems novel and old fashioned at the same time. I think I got excited about this book after read "Why Academics Writing Stinks" (http://stevenpinker.com/files/pinker/files/why_academics_stink_at_writing.pdf) which I definitely recommend you read. Some of the content of the article overlaps with Sense of Style, so when I heard about Sense of Style, I couldn’t wait to find out what was in it. 

Pinker is a cognitive scientist, a psychologist and a linguist and "Sense of Style" promises to deliver a guide to writing that goes beneath the surface of the topic itself. I am not a writer and I am not educated on the subject, and while there were parts of the book I didn't fully appreciate due to my non-familiarity with different styles of writing and with grammar, I still found fundamental principles easy enough to grasp. 

Pinker focusses the book on what he [find reference] calls "classic style". By essentially ignoring other styles except to note where they might differ or where classic style might cover for the weaknesses of another style, it seems Pinker has decided that if there's one thing he wants to teach the world about writing, it's classic style. You might wonder why, but Pinker demonstrates over and over that classic style can deliver clarity in almost any context. In fact I don't think anywhere in the book does he admit that a different style might be more applicable in different contexts. 

Pinker describes classic style: "The guiding metaphor of classic style is seeing the world. The writer can see something that the reader has not yet noticed, and he orients the reader's gaze so that she can see it for herself." As I read his descriptions of classic style, I began to recognise those things as the things I enjoyed about his writing. This strange experience of simultaneously learning a concept that is conveyed via the principles which it is advocating is quite sublime. As I read, I could really see what he meant. He calls it the "Window into a world". If there's one idea that could help your writing it is this. This is the first of three principles which foundational to good writing. 

The second principle is what is known as the curse of knowledge. Put simply, we are not very good at imagining what it's like not to know the things we actually know. It's a damning curse when trying to write, but it is actually a problem whenever trying to share knowledge. It's almost always the case, that in order to know something, you need some related knowledge first. For example, [think of a real example]. Since I discovered this concept, I have begun to notice it in practice quite often. One type of character I have seen fall victim to it is someone who is very smart, a bit introverted and quite humble. Because they are introverted, they don't like to speak at length. Because they are humble, they always assume everyone else is at least as intelligent and educated as they are. And finally because they are very well educated, intelligent or experienced, they speak about topics with the assumption that the listener will know a bunch of stuff that they usually don't know. The interesting thing here is that in this case, our intelligent orator often comes across as arrogant. Awareness of the curse of knowledge can help, as we more consciously try to anticipate what our listeners might not know, and accept that everybody regardless of background will sometimes have different background knowledge than us. At the very least, if we recognise our bias, we can try to build habits which help to balance it. 



What really excites me about classic style is its promise to cure all sorts of ailments such as "acedemese, corporatese, journalese" and so on. I always knew there was something wrong with the particular way that people expressed themselves. When I started work I quickly adopted as many corporate terms as I could in order not to appear naive. I would not simply "talk to Simon about the project", but "regarding the project, I will liase with Simon and feedback the outcome" or something else equally awful. I couldn’t imagine rebelling against this, because I thought that the style was instrinsic to professionalism, that there must be a reason for the terms and the style and I needed to learn it. To some extent it's true; but what's great in the Sense of Style is that Pinker provides you with a summary of bad tendencies which transcend the different styles and also explains when and why these styles go wrong. These tips are just too great to leave out so I will mention them all briefly. 
